# cognitive-accessibility
Doctoral research program investigating cognitive accessibility for information system users


Situating the problem up close, from a technology user’s perspective
Cognitive diversity includes a range of differences in thinking, including attention deficit/ADHD, autism spectrum, dyslexia, dyscalculia, and dysgraphia. To six million Americans with a cognitive impairment such as dyslexia or autism, navigating a hospital or clinic website to understand what services are available can be a daunting task. According to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cognitive impairment describes “when a person has trouble remembering, learning new things, concentrating, or making decisions that affect their everyday life.” Cognitive impairment spans a wide range of severity. With mild impairment, an individual will notice changes in cognitive functions, but still be able to perform everyday activities. Severe impairment often leads to losing the ability to comprehend importance or meaning and losing speech and written communication faculties. An inability to live independently is a common result in these cases (cdc.gov). Individuals with learning disabilities or cognitive differences may utilize screen readers or other audio, tactile control, and translation technologies to assist their access to content and often modify content to suit their needs. Individuals with physical or sensory disabilities also face a higher prevalence of cognitive challenges.
Jamie Knight, a speaker, writer, and self-described autistic web developer, describes cognitive accessibility as “just the edge of usability”, “I can’t choose what my body is doing but I can choose the tools. I can make life enjoyable by choosing them carefully and finding the fun in the things I use.”
Jamie’s blog describes his mixed experiences dealing with the systems and interfaces that have evolved over time to serve the average needs of the neurotypical person. Peering just beyond the usability of this world-as-built reveals a great deal of opportunity to gain the expertise of a much wider range of talented individuals just like Jamie.


Situating the problem up close, from an organization’s perspective
From the perspective of information system designers and builders, gathering, organizing, and balancing diverse inputs is not unique to life science and healthcare organizations, but addressing the challenges and requirements across the health care domain are necessary to move the field forward in designing and deploying inclusive medical and life science technology. 
For example, Pai and Huang (2011) consider the paramount nature of patient safety and a rapidly growing level of technical sophistication in light of the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), asserting that providers of health care should “not only focus on these influential forces during the system introduction period, but also continuously improve their service qualities.” The research question requires an exploration of how purpose-driven service quality investments affect stakeholder perceptions in healthcare information systems. If information system usability is driven by service quality, then supporting accessible healthcare technology over the long run will require continuing commitment, through incremental investments in service quality.
Sutcliffe, Sawyer, et al (2020) further describe the experience of gathering requirements from experts in clinical and cognitive neurosciences for dementia detection. An enlightening discussion reveals the wide variety of detection and awareness requirements for IS, “with sensor and intelligent interpreter components that can detect complex changes in several variables.” Explicitly anchoring or tagging some aspects of user experience design as “unknown unknowns” in IS research and design may help healthcare organizations identify areas in which universal system accessibility is at risk. This article also inspires an investigation into how to deploy accessibility-measuring machine learning (ML) for users of healthcare information systems, with an intent to use the ML insights for continuous IS improvement.


Situating the problem from afar
According to the American Community Survey, and annual surveys from the Census Bureau, 68% of people aged 16 to 64 without disabilities work. In contrast, the working percentage of people with cognitive disabilities aged 16 to 64 is only 24%. Cognitive disability is a broad category with people who report difficulties remembering, concentrating, or learning (autismnow.org).
Society is missing out on the talents and contributions of people who could fill tens of thousands of open jobs, and inaccessible information systems hurt the individual with learning style that is different from the average, including, but not limited to, physical sense differences (sound and color perception, sonic and visual acuity) or cognitive impairment.
We are motivated by an interest in extending the view in customer experience (CX), user experience (UX), and marketing, that organizations should move (and are already gradually moving) toward finding and serving an “audience of one”. Operationalizing this idea requires researching, designing, developing, and supporting experience and interaction systems that are inclusive for people who experience, understand, and think about the world differently.


The Utah State University-affiliated Institute for Disability Research, Policy, and Practice outlines three critical considerations that support the research question and bring additional light to the need for research and attention on neurodiversity:
1.	“There are many types of cognitive and learning disabilities and an even wider variety of needs and capabilities of users who have these disabilities.”
2.	“This population is larger than those with all other physical and sensory disabilities combined.”
3.	“Because needs vary across these disabilities, it's difficult to make definitive recommendations that will universally help all users with cognitive and learning disabilities.” (WebAIM.org)


Problem Statement: What factors are necessary for positive perception in healthcare technology? Gathering, organizing, and balancing diverse inputs is not unique to healthcare organizations, but we are addressing the challenges and requirements across the domain to move the field forward--designing and deploying inclusive medical and life science technology for individuals who, because of cognitive processing variability, perceive and interact with the world around them in a way that is different than what is commonly conceived by technology and experience designers as ‘average’.
